>> Hello and
welcome to the Haskell weekly podcast. I'm your host,
Taylor Fausak. I'm the lead engineer at
ITProTV. And earlier this week, I
was at the Haskell Exchange 2020 Conference,
learning about the new Haskell Foundation,
as announced by Simon Peyton Jones. If you haven't heard
about it yet, I encourage you to go check out the talk on
YouTube and the AMA on Reddit. There will be
links in the show notes.
>> And I'm Cameron Gera
another engineer here at
ITProTV. And it is
November, and it is the state of
Haskell Survey is out there for you guys
to check out. We would love to hear your opinions.
It is open until November 14th. So
that is this coming Saturday for those who
listen right away. So please, please, please go check
it out. We would love to hear your feedback.
>> And I am Andres Schmois.
Also an engineer here at
ITProTV. I have
been doing Haskell now for I would
say about a year and a half very much enjoying it.
Uh, today we will be talking
about a blog post, uh,
called names are not type safety.
>> It's a hot topic, huh?
>> Yeah. At the blog post is by Alexis
King.
>> So, what did you think when you first read this blog post
Andres?
>> Uh, I I
tend to think
blog posts that tell me
something that they're not seem pretty
aggressive from the beginning. Um,
it took me a little while to realize what it was
trying to say because I start to see red
when things are aggressive. Mhm.
But no. Just kidding, uh,
the the blog post tries to
say that new types are,
uh, potentially
not a good thing when dealing
with type safety in a language. However,
it at first I
thought that the blog post tried to tell you not to
use them and just to go straight for using the
variables or the primitive types themselves.
Uh, but then I started to realize that
that's not exactly what it meant. It was more,
uh, you know, just make sure that
the new types that you use are,
uh
okay. And they won't tell you
that the code is type safe
just because you're using them.
>> Yeah. I had a similar thought process as you
where when I first read this blog post, I
thought it was trying to say we
shouldn't use new types, But really, I've
come to realize that. I think it's saying or Alexis is saying
that new types
may not give you all of the
securities that you think you're getting from them, and
you have to keep that in mind when you work with them. What did you think about
it, Cam?
>> Yeah, so
starting. I really I was
intrigued at first because, you know,
like Andres said, this is kind of against the grain, right? Like,
don't use something that everybody uses
and you know, So it kind of felt aggressive in the
beginning. But I realized that, you know, she's
trying to express that. You know,
new types have value, but don't
get just confused with using them
for, you know, changing the name right. At that
point, you should just use a type alias. Or something
lighter, less heavyweight that
you can actually change the underlying type of
where, as with a new type you could, you know,
if you're exporting the constructor and
allowing modification to happen anywhere you can
kind of get yourself into a bind. And
you know, I like her leading example too,
uh which at first I thought it was gonna be
like, Yeah, I never use new types only always
get to the bottom of the construction and make sure every
impossible cases gone. She's just saying like,
That's a nice to have, like, that's something. If you can do it,
do it because it's gonna provide that safety
and allow you not to have to worry about handling quote
unquote the impossible case.
>> Right?
>> So I thought that was good value.
>> So the example that she starts with is a
hypothetical data type that represents the numbers from 1
to 5. So a very synthetic example. And
she shows how if you define it the
maybe normal way as an ADT
where you have five constructors named one through
five and she compares that to using a
new type wrapper around int and kind of shows. I think some of the
pros and cons of each approach, um,
and it starts to get at the question
of, um, what this
the title of the blog post gets at, which is what is type
safety. And it's kind of showing you that
with the ADT you are actually
excluding impossible cases from your code. And and
that's type safety, I think. Um,
whereas if you use a new type, you
are giving yourself the ability to
exclude cases in your runtime,
but they you still have to account for them when you're writing your code.
>> Right, because the compiler is gonna say, Hey, you're missing something
here.
>> And I think we need to keep in mind
exactly what
your new types are used for. So in this
example, uh, the obvious choice is to use
the 1 to 5. Uh,
because you know, there's only
five fields and the compiler
will tell you when you add a new case
where you've used it. And that doesn't
completely remove the possibility that you use,
uh, pattern matching that that
matches on multiple patterns. But that's normally
looked as you know, it's a whole another topic altogether.
But, um, that's more type
safe to use an ADT Than use a new type here. But
what about, for example, that you know the example that
she herself shows here, which is the new type email
address wrapped around a text type,
and I think that's where
the main question is about.
Is that type safe or isn't it type safe? In my
opinion, very off the top, I think
it is type safe. Um, it is not
always type safe, but just a wrapper around
text can be type safe.
>> Right. And that's the pardon, the pun.
That's the type of thing we use a lot in our code base here
at ITProTV, where we have things that
are representationally the same. So
like an email address and somebody's first name.
Um, and we want to distinguish those. So we
want to give them separate names. But we don't want to
actually make a type in our code
base that is correct by construction
or the correct by construction encoding of an email
address. Because I'm struggling to think of
what that would even look like emails are horrendously
complicated. You know, you start out thinking like, Oh, it's pretty simple. There's
only a couple parts, but, uh, we don't need to get
into that. That could be an entirely separate ah thing,
but the point for me is that, like,
yes, you're not actually getting any additional type
safety here in, like, excluding impossible cases. But
you are saying that I'm not gonna accidentally use somebody's
name as an email address.
>> Rgiht. Yeah. So bottom line is, there
still needs to be some layer of validation
for the underlying text of the email. If
you're worried about that being, you know, some something a
user you know, misconstrues and sends in
some, you know, SQL injection that
messes up your entire database, which I would
imagine we're gonna escape it correctly. But you never
know so I think that is Ah,
you know, something to note as well is like
it may not be quote unquote the
underlying construction of an email. Correct. But you
can do validation with that type and say, Hey, I'm
gonna give you quote unquote an email from text and
I want you to validate that is quote unquote still an email.
And so you know, in that way, yes, it's
an extra step, but it's a lot less
headache.
>> Right. And that validation uses a very
common pattern in Haskell and probably other
languages as well. But where you have
a module that only exposes the type and then
a smart constructor. So, uh,
this is the way that she talks about this in the post
is, um, new types as a token.
So you're saying that since the only way you
can construct, for example, an email address is
using this blessed function in this
module, then you can use the the email
address type as a token that says, I have
validated this thing and all of the functions that operate on that
type are responsible for holding those
invariants.
>> And I'd just like to mention that
we say validated a lot, but I think
we all really mean parse it. So
you know, there's that entire blog post by the same
person that says parse don't validate.
Uh, the
the thing I want to mention is that we
don't check to see if the email is valid
or, you know, if the name is valid or
whatever, um, we try to parse it
and if it fails to parse, then that
is an invalid email. So I think we use validate in
parse pretty
interchangeably
because you know that that's the right
way, at least that we think we should program those
types.
>> That tends to be our parsing, validating
for us tends to be the same.
>> Right. And email addresses is maybe a bad example
because they are very complicated. And even if you have something that
looks like an email address that successfully parses
it will, you know you may never be able to send an email to that
thing. Um, but
bringing up the parse don't validate Post is a great point, and
she brings it up in this Post is well, because
maybe a simpler example to grapple with is the non empty
list where if you take the approach of
parsing, you might go with this new type approach where it's a
wrapper around a list, and when you
construct it, you prove to yourself
that it's not empty, and then you hand the thing back, and every time you
operate on it, you have to grapple with that invariant,
or you can validate it and produce a
data structure that carries around that validation.
Um, and again, I think the
crux of this blog post is showing that those approaches
have different tradeoffs and there. Um,
one is arguably less type
safe, and one is more type safe.
>> So when um,
you know, we talk about using new types deriving
versus, you know, deconstruct,
constructing something that could never have the impossible case, you
know, And we do different types of development.
In what situation would we choose to do?
New type, deriving versus? You know, the
alternate, which is, Well, it's not
really the only alternate, but it's the alternate kind of in this discussion
of constructing out the impossible case.
>> So I think that
using new types,
um, is usually a
preferred way that I like to program
because, um as long as these
new types are simple and they don't do more
than, um, you know, then the need
to I think you're constraining yourself to this
This, like this module, not
module in the Haskell module sense. But this
section, um, And
when you do the opposite, which is to use type alias
or just not use the new type,
you're opening this up to pretty
much whatever it wants to be or whatever it can
be, which in this, you know, if we use a text, it could just be
a string of characters.
Um, now
the I think the only
bad. I don't think it's bad, but the only
downside of using a new
type is feeling. So
just because a new type is there for some
people, it might feel as if it's type safe or
isn't type safe. And that really
should just be dependent on your programming,
not the actual code itself.
So just because you're using a new type doesn't
necessarily mean it's not type safe. It just means
it can be, you know, something of a new type.
So I think we need to focus on the
fact of what
is the alternative of not using a new type.
So do we not use
them? Do we use type
aliases? Do we just, you know, you strings
text int whatever. Do we go
even crazier and go into liquid Haskell or refinement
type or anything like that? Um, I don't
know, but I prefer to use new types, and I
don't think this blog tells you what
to do. Um, I think
that's a critic
of Of what I'm trying to say is
that this blog doesn't
really say anything, so it doesn't say
Don't do this or do that, or it just says,
you know things about how Alexis
feels, Uh, when programming, which
is totally fine. Uh, but
that's that left me with the question of like, Okay,
what do I do? And so yeah, that's where I am.
>> Yeah, this blog post is not prescriptive. It doesn't
say Use new types in this situation or
use ADTs in this other situation.
And you mentioned Liquid Haskell refinement, typing,
dependent typing. I think that there is a sliding
scale here where at one end you have
using the primitive types or the types that are already
available to you strings, text int whatever.
And then as you progress, you introduce
type aliases, which don't give you any safety
at all. But they let you, um, express
intent, maybe with your type signatures. And then you
have new types which give you a little bit of type safety
more than type aliases. But less than ADTs and then
ADTs give you even more, and that's kind of where it stops for
Haskell. But as you add liquid
Haskell, you could do refinement types. So that example we started
with a number between one and five with liquid
Haskell, you could have a function that takes a regular
primitive int. But you can express that there's a
refinement on that where it has to be between one and five. And it will
check those for you. Um and then all the way on the
far end of the spectrum, you can do dependent typing like Agda or
Idris Um, and Haskell seems to be inching its
way in that direction as well. Um, and for
me, I think I'm in the same boat as you Andres where my preference is
to stay as close to
the simpler or primitive side of
that until some problem
happens. And that, I think, is where for me, the benefit of new types
is where you can start
to see the invariants that you wish your type
had. So, like you can start with a new type around text. But if
you're always like with an email address splitting on the at
sign, then you may think, Okay, I should make a type where it's already
split up, and I don't have to do that all the time.
Um, but you know, clearly this comes
with experience, and it's a judgment call. So like when we
separate email addresses from first names? That's not
because we've had a bunch of bugs in our past
at ITProTV, where we mix them up. It's
that in my professional experience, I
have seen or maybe not even
seen but been afraid of bugs like that. So I just want to
exclude them from the right out of the gate. I don't wanna have
them be possible.
>> Yeah, and I would say
I'm going to continue to use new types, and I think they
are very good for what
they do. I do think I've
been bit a couple of times
by, you know, some underscore case that
captures, you know, something that I wasn't
expecting it to happen, which, like
Andres said, that's, ah, programming error not necessarily a
language error, Um, but I
think the like. Factoring out to the impossible
case is ideal at
some point, kind of like you, said Taylor. Like, if we're always
splitting at the at sign, then let's just make a type that
has two, you know, some email with
two texts pieces
and, you know
it.
Ideally, it would be
easier to refactor or factor out the impossible
case. But sometimes it's not so new types
is really sometimes the best you can, do. And
so you know, I think she was
trying to bring some just awareness
to the fact that, like naming something
as something else doesn't really
guarantee it's always gonna be right,
And, you know, and I appreciate her going out on a
limb in that regard, but it doesn't
necessarily change my feeling because, like you said, it wasn't really like a
hey, don't do this But do this instead, which, you
see a lot in blog posts. I think it was just saying,
Hey, just just to be aware, this doesn't really
mean you're more type safe because you're using new types.
>> Yeah, and it also does a good job of
comparing these things against each other, the
data type versus the new type and
showing you how how you work with them, how you produce them,
how you consume them. Um, and that highlights. I
think some of the costs of new types where you
have to do all of this wrapping and unwrapping and
derive all these instances that are already
available on the type you're wrapping, so it's like
it's kind of like boilerplate. And it's,
um maybe it's a position of privilege
as a Haskell programmer to call two lines of a bunch of
type classes boilerplate. You know, you're not actually writing all
those instances, but you still have to derive them.
>> There, um, you know the blog.
You know, we talked a lot about you know what things are and
aren't And I think one thing that
we probably should mention is you can
misuse new types, and that's
true of almost any
programming feature. You
can most of the times misuse something. And I
think one thing in this blog post is the
argument name example where it's just
some kind of complex type that
will derive a whole bunch of stuff. And at
the end of the day, it just turns out that using this
new type is exactly the same as using a type alias. Now,
in that case, and probably many
other cases, this is not type
safe. So we are
allowing the possibility of
constructing a type
without actually touching the type, and so
that that is, I think, something to
point out is that just because you use type
safe. I'm sorry. New type doesn't necessarily
mean that you have even
any type safety. Now you can
use new types and have type safety.
But you have to be. You have to make sure that your new
type does do what you want it to do. And there's
a lot of examples of how to make new types
into basically not type
safe types. And I think a lot of that, you know,
you go into coerce or converting from one to
the other convertible. You know, that kind of stuff that
can get fuzzy between type safety
and not type safe. So that's
that's a good argument, and I
think that this blog makes very good
arguments. But we should be
mindful that new types are very
useful tool and we shouldn't
shy away from them. I mean, I don't think anyone's ever going to
shy away from new type. They are one of the most use features
of Haskell Just wanted to mention that
we shouldn't just start removing
all new types from our code bases.
>> New types are definitely a mainstay of Haskell programming,
and I doubt they'll go anywhere on the argument
name. I think it's hard to say in a
vacuum if it is truly unnecessary
and should have been a type alias or even
like a Haddock comment on arguments,
you know, just say like, Oh, this is It's called argument
name So that's confusing on function parameters. You'd say a
comment here. This is the argument name. Um, but it
could be that in this code base, there are lots of
different types of names that it's worthwhile to
differentiate between them, like an argument name versus a
function name or an argument name versus module name.
Um, so we can't really say, you
know, we're not looking at the code base so We'll have to
take Alexis's word here that this was, in fact,
an unnecessary wrapper, and you pay the cost of
wrapping and unwrapping it everywhere. But you don't ever get any benefit from
it.
>> Yeah, And I think the main thing to look into
here is something like
overloaded strings with, um
is string derivative. And
I think that that is what makes a new type
potentially useless. Um, it's still
not useless because they're still, um,
you know the value from using it in a function, for
example. But in terms of type safety, you've just thrown
it out the window. It's no longer just
an email address. It is now any string.
So any string could become
an email address, which I think that should have
been talked about more. Um, you know, in terms of type
safety of whether or not we should be
focusing on type safety as
conversion. So if we want to go from
something into a new type,
what is the best way? Do we use
wrapping functions that we use record type
wrapping? Do we use instances?
You know that? I think that's very
interesting and it's a problem that's been plaguing me for, you know,
since I started and I would like to have an
answer to it. I just you know, it's
still something that I'm struggling with, and
I'm sure there are answers or many answers. But what is the
right one?
>> Yeah, I think we've stumbled upon yet
another good topic for another podcast episode,
so we'll have to talk about that one of these days.
>> Yes.
>> Well, Cam, do you have any closing thoughts about this?
Names are not type safety blog post.
>> I think we've covered it really Well, I really appreciate you guys
coming on the podcast today to kind of talk about it. I really value you guys's
opinion. You're a little more seasoned under the
development belt than I am. So, you know, I've learned a
lot from your opinions as well as Alexis's here
so yeah, I think it was a good post Created some
good conversation, and it seems like what,
four or five new podcast topics. So, you know, I
think I think we've got a lot lot going for us here.
>> Yeah. Agreed Andres, How about you?
>> Uh, yeah. I don't have much more to add.
Just like to reiterate new
types of good size bad sides. I think we
should be very mindful of them. And,
uh, you know, the better
code you write is always going to be the better answer, regardless
of what others think.
So
>> Yeah. All right. Well, I think that will do it
for us today. Thank you for listening to the
Haskell weekly podcast. I have been your host, Taylor
Fausak. Um, if you wanna follow us
on social media, you can check out our website, which
is Haskell weekly dot news. From there, you could find links to
our Twitter Reddit GitHub All the various
places we are.
>> Yep, And Haskell Weekly is brought to you by
ITProTV a e learning
platform for IT professionals and
also our employer. And they want to
extend a gracious offer to you
guys of 30% off the lifetime of your
subscription with the promo code.
Haskell Weekly 30. All One word.
All caps Easy peasy
if you ever have any questions. Member Services team is pretty bomb here
at ITProTV. So they'd love to help you out.
But go check it out. We'd love to see you
seeing what's going on in the IT world.
>> Stay safe.
>> See you next week.
>> Take it easy.